By now, you should have an understanding
of what cluster analysis is.
And also, a good grasp on the type
of business questions that this
technique is able to answer.
Before we review the methods for
performing the analysis,
we need to discuss data preparation.
And we also need to discuss
how clustering methods
measure the similarity
between observations.
While datasets could contain
a wide variety of data types.
For the purpose of this discussion we
will focus on two most common data types,
numerical and categorical.
Numerical variables include quantities
that may be continuous, such as time.
Or integer, such as number of purchases or
number of dependents.
Categorical variables may be ordinal or
nominal.
An ordinal variable implies
some sort of ranking.
For instance, a customer satisfaction
rating is stated as high,
medium, and low, implies an order.
Therefore, a value transformation to
a numerical variable will be to make
high equal to 3,
medium equal to 2 and low equal to 1.
Note that these transformations imply
that the difference between high and
medium is the same as the difference
between medium and low.
Nominal variables on the other hand,
can be thought of representing choices.
Political party affiliations
are nominal data.
In the United States for example,
this nominal data would indicate Democrat,
Republican, or Independent voters.
These choices do not imply
any particular order, and
therefore they cannot be transformed
into a single numerical variable.
The transformation
requires binary variables.
A binary variable has two possible values,
0 and 1.
The number of binary variables needed for
the transformation is equal to
the number of categories minus 1.
Note that in the transformation for
the political affiliation,
we use two binary variables,
because there are three categories.
A Democrat is transformed into a value of
1 for variable 1, and a variable of 0 for
a variable 2.
A Republican is transformed
into a value of 0 for
variable 1, and
a value of 1 for variable 2.
And then Independent has a value of 0 for
both variables.
A special case of nominal data occurs
when there are only two categories.
For instance, yes or no options.
For yes is typically given the value of 1,
and no is given the value of 0.
Most software packages for data analysis
include tools that can transform
categorical data that is given in
the form of text to numerical variables.
Although software can perform these
transformations automatically.
It is always good to verify how
categorical variables are being
transformed, to avoid problems such as the
software treating nominal data as ordinal.
Datasets may contain variables with
values that are on very different scales.
Therefore it is recommended to perform
data analysis, such as clustering.
On normalized, or also called standardized
data instead of the original data.
Normalization takes care of differences in
scale by transforming each original value
to its standard value.
The operation consists of
subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation.
In this example, we have age and
income data for five people.
The average age of the sample is 42.20
years and the average income is 105,000.
The last two columns of the table
show the normalized values, for
instance, the normalized
age of Ann is -0.4948.
Which is the result of subtracting
the average age of the group,
which is 42.20 years from Ann's age,
which is 35 years.
And then dividing by
the standard deviation of 14.55.
The normalized value means that Ann's
age is 0.4948 standard
deviations below the mean.
The normalized values for age and
income are now on the same scale.
That is with an average of 0 and
a standard deviation of 1.
The normalized values allow us to
identify the outliers in our dataset.
And they eliminate biases from variables
with relatively large original values.
Also, normalized values enable
an easier interpretation of cluster
analysis results.
Since the mean of a normalized
variable is zero, we are able to
easily detect values that are above the
mean and those that are below the mean.
We're also able to know
how far a value is from
the mean in terms of standard deviations.
A normalized value for
instance of 1.7 means
that the original value is 1.7
standard deviations above the mean.
To do cluster analysis we need
a measure of distance, or
the similarity between observations.
The Euclidean distance is
the most commonly used measure of
the similarity between two observations.
This measure is the equivalent of the
straight line distance between two objects
in a two-dimensional space.
Using the normalized age and
income values in our previous example,
we can compute the distances from
each pair of persons in our set.
For instance,
the distance between David and Ann, or
the distance between David and Clara.
Then a scatter plot can be used to
create a graphical representation
of the distance between
each pair of observations.
The plot shows that in terms of age and
income,
David is at least three times closer or
more similar to Ann, than he is to Clara.
This make sense,
since David is both closer in age and
income to Ann, than he is to Clara.
Now that we have a way to measure
distances between observations,
we need to establish a measure
of distance between clusters.
There are five distance
measures between clusters.
And they are single linkage,
complete linkage,
average linkage, average group linkage,
and Ward's method.
In single linkage the distance
between two clusters is determined by
the minimum distance between every pair of
objects that are not in the same cluster.
Complete linkage uses a maximum
distance between objects that are not
in the same cluster.
Average linkage calculate the average of
all distances across the two clusters.
Average group linkage is the distance
between the center of one cluster
to the center of the other.
Ward's method uses a sum
of squares criterion.
The sum of squares refers to the squared
distance from each observation
to the centroid of the cluster
to which it is assigned.
Let's go through the calculations
using the data in our simple example.
Suppose that Clara and
Erin form a cluster,
the centroid of this cluster is
the average normalized values.
So in our example we have 0.9828 and
0.0906 as the average of the normalized
age and the average of the normalized
income for the members of the cluster.
We then calculate the squared distance
from each cluster member to the centroid.
The squared distance is calculated by
adding the squared differences for
each variable value and the centroid.
For example, Clara has a normalized age
of 1.567 and the centroid is 0.9828.
So we square the difference
between these two numbers,
we do the same for the normalized income.
The result is a squared
distance of 0.3495.
Then we go through the same
calculations for Erin.
Because the cluster has only two members,
the centroid is exactly
halfway between them.
The sum of the squares for
this cluster is 0.699.
The sum of squares for
our complete solution is the aggregate of
sum of the squares for all the clusters.
Since each cluster method may
generate a different outcome,
it is generally recommended to
experiment and compare results.
In this slide, we show how single
linkage does better than k-means and
Ward's method in these
two-dimensional problems.
However, no single method will
always outperform the others.
We have reviewed three concepts
that are critical to performing
a valid cluster analysis.
First, data should be in the correct form
by taking into consideration
what each variable represents.
Second, and
a proper metric should be established
to be able to measure the distance
between every pair of observations.
And third, we must decide how distance
between clusters is going to be measured.
We are now ready to review how the most
common clustering methods operate.